Add a `SaslTermination` filter (#124)
kroxylicious/design: proposals/124-sasl-termination.md

- Client credentials should not be shared with or managed by the Kafka cluster administrators.
- Different credential lifecycles are needed for client-facing and broker-facing authentication.
- Compliance requirements mandate credential isolation between organizational boundaries.

### Authentication protocol translation

The proxy can authenticate clients using one SASL mechanism (e.g. `SCRAM-SHA-256`) while using an entirely different authentication mechanism to connect to the broker (e.g. mTLS, or `OAUTHBEARER`). This enables:

- Migrating broker authentication without changing client configurations.
- Using client-friendly mechanisms even when the broker supports only a limited set.
- Integrating with identity providers that don't have native Kafka client support.

### Zero-trust edge authentication

In a zero-trust architecture the proxy can enforce authentication at the network edge before any Kafka protocol traffic reaches brokers. Unauthenticated clients are rejected immediately, reducing the broker's attack surface.

> ### Centralized credential management

Reviewer: "A single credential store serves all proxy instances, rather than requiring per-broker credential configuration."

This isn't strictly wrong but it invites a problematic reading — that there's a single credential store instance shared across all virtual clusters. Since the design follows the KMS pattern, the credential store is defined per virtual cluster. Could this be reworded to avoid implying a scope broader than what the design actually delivers?

Author: Yeah, it's not so clear. I've reworded it. Resolving this.

A single credential store serves all proxy instances, rather than requiring per-broker credential configuration. Combined with the proxy's existing plugin system, this allows integration with enterprise credential stores.

### Broker-less authentication

A key problem with any passthrough-based technique is that it depends on the availability of a specific Kafka cluster. With the advent of the routing API described by [Proposal 072][proposal-072] there is a need to be able to authenticate a client session before a connection has been made to any target cluster. This is unavoidable because the identity of the client might be an input to the subsequent routing decisions.

## Proposal

This proposal aims to support the following SASL mechanisms: `SCRAM-SHA-256`, `SCRAM-SHA-512` and `OAUTHBEARER`.
It also aims to be flexible, so as to allow other mechanisms to be supported in the future.

> The proposal is organized per-component. Each component section covers its summary, API surfaces, configuration, threats and mitigations, and known limitations.

Reviewer: Before diving into the per-component detail, it would really help to have a high-level view of how the components interact — something like an architecture diagram showing what composes into what, what calls what, and where the module boundaries are. The component-by-component structure makes each piece clear in isolation but makes it hard to hold the overall shape in your head. A 40,000 ft sketch here would make the rest of the proposal much easier to follow.

Author: I added an overview paragraph. I'll take a look at the diagrams you suggested. Resolving this in the meantime.

> ### Component 1: SaslTermination filter

Reviewer: There's no mention of metrics or observability anywhere in this proposal. For a filter that makes authentication decisions on every client connection, this feels like an important gap. Operators need visibility into:

- Authentication outcomes (successes, failures, by mechanism)
- Failure reasons (unknown user, bad credentials, expired token, etc.)
- Reauthentication behaviour (on-time vs. late vs. expired without reauth)
- Authentication latency

The decision-making here is security-critical and opaque to operators without metrics. If something goes wrong — a misconfigured credential store, an unreachable JWKS endpoint, a spike in failed auth attempts — how does an operator see it?

On latency: I think we need both inclusive and exclusive of the fixed timing delay. The inclusive metric is useful for anomaly detection — if the operator configures a 200ms delay and a path starts taking 250ms or shows up at 150ms, that's worth alerting on. But the exclusive metric is what tells you about real performance: a slow credential store lookup, an unreachable JWKS endpoint, etc.

Author: Good catch. The logging is done in the runtime when the `FilterContext` methods get called, but we lack metrics right now. Metrics are part of https://github.com/kroxylicious/design/pull/85, but we can't really wait for that. So I've added some metrics to the proposal, both at the runtime level and, where helpful, at the filter level.

On the "inclusive-of-delay latency metric". I think this would be more suitable as a WARN level log, rather than a metric. It's basically saying something quite specific: The configured delay is not enough to protect against user enumeration via a timing side channel, consider increasing the delay. 

I've also made the timing attack delay configurable. That also allows people to turn it off if their threat model doesn't require covering user enumeration.

Reviewer: The metrics additions look sensible. I'm not sure a WARN log is the right mechanism for the inclusive-of-delay latency, but it's not worth holding up the proposal over.

#### Summary

The `SaslTermination` filter is a `@Plugin`-annotated `FilterFactory` that intercepts `SASL_HANDSHAKE` and `SASL_AUTHENTICATE` requests, authenticating clients at the proxy and short-circuiting the responses without forwarding them to the broker. Multiple mechanisms are configured within a single filter instance because the Kafka SASL protocol requires it: the client sends a `SaslHandshakeRequest` naming its chosen mechanism, and the server responds with the set of supported mechanisms. A filter-per-mechanism model would not work because no single filter would have the complete set of supported mechanisms to advertise in the `SaslHandshakeResponse`.

Key features:

> - **Security barrier.** Until a client has successfully authenticated, the only requests permitted are `API_VERSIONS`, `SASL_HANDSHAKE`, and `SASL_AUTHENTICATE`. All other request types are rejected with `SASL_AUTHENTICATION_FAILED` and the connection is closed.

Reviewer: The security barrier pattern here — gate all requests until a precondition is met, allow only specifically listed ApiKeys through — is something we see repeated across the codebase in various forms.

I'm not suggesting expanding the scope of this proposal to cover it, but I think it's worth exploring this more. A project-authored filter would be an interesting start but we lack a signaling mechanism for publishing the allowlist or the ready/not-ready conditions, so maybe it's just a battle-tested implementation that filter authors can leverage?

Author: Created https://github.com/kroxylicious/kroxylicious/issues/4453 to capture this point

- **Reauthentication (KIP-368).** When `maxTimeBeforeReauth` is configured, the filter includes a `sessionLifetimeMs` value in `SaslAuthenticateResponse` (v1+), informing the client when to reauthenticate. Sessions that expire without reauthentication are rejected and closed.
- **Mechanism dispatch.** The filter delegates each authentication exchange to a `MechanismHandler` obtained from the appropriate `MechanismHandlerFactory` (see Component 2). The filter itself is mechanism-agnostic.

#### State machine

The filter maintains per-connection state using a sealed interface `State` with four concrete states:

| From state | Triggering event | To state |
|------------|------------------|----------|
| **RequiringHandshake** | `SASL_HANDSHAKE` with supported mechanism | **RequiringAuthenticate** |
| **RequiringAuthenticate** | `SASL_AUTHENTICATE` → handler returns `CHALLENGE` | **RequiringAuthenticate** (loop) |
| **RequiringAuthenticate** | `SASL_AUTHENTICATE` → handler returns `SUCCESS` | **Authenticated** |
| **RequiringAuthenticate** | `SASL_AUTHENTICATE` → handler returns `FAILURE` | **Failed** |

> | **Authenticated** | `SASL_HANDSHAKE` (reauthentication) | **RequiringAuthenticate** |

Reviewer: I'm surprised there isn't an `Expired` state in the state machine. The table says session expiry leads to "reject and close", but the reauthentication section (line 109) says SASL_HANDSHAKE and SASL_AUTHENTICATE are always accepted regardless of session expiry. So the behaviour after expiry is different from `Failed` — expired sessions can still reauthenticate, failed ones can't. That distinction deserves its own state.

An explicit `Expired` state would also help clarify what happens to already in-flight requests and responses when expiry is detected. Is it an instant close, or is there a drain period? As a proxy we are in a different position to the broker itself in this respect.

Relatedly, the proxy knows the session lifetime (it sets it via `sessionLifetimeMs`) — does it also know when to expect the SASL_HANDSHAKE for reauthentication? I'm wondering about exposing metrics around reauthentication: how often clients reauth on time vs. late, whether sessions are expiring without reauth, etc.

Author: I agree that conceptually it feels like there ought to be an `Expired` state. However, in the code there are good reasons not to introduce one. In Claude's words:

1. Expiry is lazily detected — there's no timer. It's checked in `handleDefaultRequest` when the next non-SASL request arrives. An `Expired` state would be momentary — the connection is immediately closed or transitions to `RequiringAuthenticate` for reauth. It never rests in `Expired`.
2. It complicates the handshake guard — `onSaslHandshakeRequest` currently accepts handshakes from `RequiringHandshake || Authenticated`. Adding `Expired` means three states, and `Expired` would need its own `nextStateReauthenticate()` method that duplicates `Authenticated.nextStateReauthenticate()`.
3. `Expired` carries the same data as `Authenticated` — it's the same authorizationId and sessionExpiry, just with a flag saying "you're past the deadline." That's exactly what the `if (expiry != null && clock.instant().isAfter(expiry))` check already captures.

My preference is for the code to be as clear as possible (thus more easily audited). I think it would also be confusing is the proposal spoke about a state which didn't exist in the implementation code. 

I've added some text explaining the lack of an `Expired`. Marking this as resolved.

1. The configured `maxTimeBeforeReauth` value.
2. The handler-reported credential/token lifetime (e.g. the JWT token's expiry for OAUTHBEARER).

If either value is zero (no opinion / no expiry), the other is used. If both are zero, no reauthentication is required.

Reauthentication is a protocol-level feature, not mechanism-specific — all mechanisms support it. The difference is the session lifetime source:
- **SCRAM:** Credentials do not expire, so the handler reports no lifetime. `maxTimeBeforeReauth` is the sole source of session lifetime. Without it configured, SCRAM sessions never require reauthentication.
- **OAUTHBEARER:** Tokens have an inherent expiry. The handler reports the token's remaining lifetime, and the effective session lifetime is `min(maxTimeBeforeReauth, tokenExpiry)`. Even without `maxTimeBeforeReauth`, sessions expire when the token does.

**Client behaviour:** Standard Kafka clients (4.0+) handle reauthentication transparently via the `Selector`. When the session nears expiry, the client sends a new `SASL_HANDSHAKE` + `SASL_AUTHENTICATE` sequence over the existing connection. This is invisible to application code.

> **Server-side enforcement:** If the session has expired and a non-SASL request arrives, the filter rejects it with `SASL_AUTHENTICATION_FAILED` and closes the connection. `SASL_HANDSHAKE` and `SASL_AUTHENTICATE` requests are always accepted regardless of session expiry, to allow reauthentication.

Reviewer: The expired session behaviour here accepts SASL_HANDSHAKE and SASL_AUTHENTICATE, but the pre-auth security barrier (line 68) also accepts API_VERSIONS. Is the difference in allowlists intentional?

If they are different, that's another reason an explicit `Expired` state would help — it has its own allowlist that's subtly different from both the pre-auth and authenticated states.

Author: There's no _need_ for a client to make `API_VERSIONS` after the firs time, but there's no security need to prevent them making `API_VERSIONS` again. I've clarified the text. Resolving this.

#### API surfaces

The filter is a standard Kroxylicious `FilterFactory` plugin. It does not define any new public API. It uses:

- `FilterFactory<SaslTerminationConfig>` (from `kroxylicious-api`) -- the standard filter factory contract.
- `RequestFilter` (from `kroxylicious-api`) -- for intercepting requests.
- `FilterContext.clientSaslAuthenticationSuccess()` / `clientSaslAuthenticationFailure()` (from `kroxylicious-api`, added by Proposal 006) -- to propagate authentication outcomes.
- `MechanismHandlerFactory` (internal, see Component 2) -- for mechanism dispatch.

#### Configuration

The filter is configured via `SaslTerminationConfig`:

| Option | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|--------|------|----------|---------|-------------|

> | `mechanisms` | `Map<String, MechanismConfig>` | Yes | -- | Map of IANA-registered mechanism name to mechanism-specific configuration. At least one entry is required. |

Reviewer: `mechanisms` is typed as `Map<String, MechanismConfig>` but the keys are described as IANA-registered mechanism names. Given that the supported mechanisms are a closed set (sealed `MechanismConfig`, adding a new one requires code changes anyway), shouldn't the key be an enum rather than a free-form string? That would give config-time validation rather than a runtime "unknown mechanism" error.

Author: > Given that the supported mechanisms are a closed set

[KIP-492: Add java security providers in Kafka Security config](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-492:+Add+java+security+providers+in+Kafka+Security+config) added [`SecurityProviderCreator`](https://kafka.apache.org/24/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/common/security/auth/SecurityProviderCreator.html). That means Kafka can support additional mechanisms, beyond those provided built-in. 

I think the key question here is whether we should be aiming for the same level of configurability in Kroxylicious? I.e. should we allow people to provide their own `MechanismHandler`? (Even though it's not something that's configurable via the proxy configuration).

* If we don't want to support arbitrary mechanisms then we can switch to an `enum`, as you suggest. 
    * We'd also have to decide whether the `enum` contains all the mechanisms which AK supports, even those which would not get a `MechanismHandler` under this proposal.
    * Or just the ones which we're providing MechanismHandlers for. 
        * In this case we should also re-evaluate the use of `ServiceLoader` for discovering `MechanismHandlers`, because at that point we can hard code the instantiation and security auditing becomes simpler.

* If we do want to support arbitrary mechanisms we cannot use an `enum` and we'd need to un-seal `MechanismConfig` as you point out.

Reviewer: I called it a closed set because that's how the proposal describes it — `MechanismConfig` is sealed. A sealed type *is* a closed set. So the question of whether to support arbitrary mechanisms isn't one I'm introducing; it's one the proposal has already answered by sealing the config hierarchy.

If the intent is actually to support arbitrary mechanisms in future, then `MechanismConfig` shouldn't be sealed and `ServiceLoader` discovery makes sense. If the intent is the closed set the proposal currently describes, then the string key is the inconsistency, not my suggestion to use an enum.

I'd intuitively prefer a closed set, but I recognise the extensibility question presents challenges either way. What the proposal should do is be internally consistent about which answer it's chosen.

On whether matching Kafka's extensibility (KIP-492) is worthwhile: I genuinely don't know how we'd establish whether custom `SecurityProviderCreator` implementations exist in the wild, or whether there's demand to terminate arbitrary mechanisms. Without a way to gauge that, I'd favour the closed set and its attendant simplifications (enum key, hard-coded instantiation, simpler security auditing — as you noted yourself).

Reviewer 2: +1 to starting as docced in the proposal, with no user mechanism extension. We have fielded questions in the past about whether the proxy works with MSK IAM, but apart from that 3rd party mechanism implementations feel quite rare. If there was demand for something like MSK, I think it'd be better to have us explore adding it as a 1st party extension, rather than have this security hole where attackers can drop new mechanisms on the classpath.

| `maxTimeBeforeReauth` | `Duration` | No | disabled | Maximum session lifetime before reauthentication is required (KIP-368). Uses golang-style duration syntax (e.g. `1h`, `30m`, `1h30m`). Omit or set to `0` to disable. |

> The `mechanisms` map values are polymorphic. Jackson deduction-based deserialization (`@JsonTypeInfo(use = JsonTypeInfo.Id.DEDUCTION)`) resolves the concrete type from the fields present:

Reviewer: If the mechanism map key were an enum (as suggested above), the key would already identify which factory handles the exchange. That factory already knows what config type it expects. So the deduction-based polymorphism would be essentially re-deriving information that's already available from the key.

Deduction-based polymorphism is also fragile for operators: if a config block has an unexpected combination of fields (e.g. a typo in `jwksEndpointUrl`), what does the error message look like? Letting each factory validate its own config could give clearer diagnostics.

Could the factory drive config deserialization rather than Jackson deduction? This might also be worth revisiting the rejection of `@Plugin` for mechanism handlers — the config deserialization infrastructure it provides could be valuable even if the discovery aspect isn't needed. The enum key might already constrain the allowed set of plugins sufficiently.

Author: The overall point is pending a consensus on [your point above](https://github.com/kroxylicious/design/pull/124/changes#r3643038925), but there's a narrower point which we can discuss now... This is not the first use of `JsonTypeInfo.Id.DEDUCTION` in the project and the point you make about fragility has not been made before in those contexts. That doesn't mean we shouldn't avoid it here, but it feels like we'd be setting a precedent for not using it again the future. Is that a point you're advocating?

Reviewer: Not raising a concern before doesn't validate the pattern — every concern was new the first time someone raised it.

I'm not advocating a position on deduction in general. My comment is about this specific case: the map key could already identify the mechanism, the mechanism identifies the factory, and the factory knows its config type. Deduction would be re-deriving information that's already present. Whether deduction is appropriate elsewhere depends on whether that redundancy exists there too — I haven't looked, and I'm not making a claim either way.

The narrower question you can resolve independently: what does the operator see when a config block has a typo in a field name and deduction can't resolve a type?

Reviewer 2: If we turn it into a mechanisms list we could use a more direct mapping like

```java
  @JsonTypeInfo(use = JsonTypeInfo.Id.NAME, property = "type")
  @JsonSubTypes({
      @JsonSubTypes.Type(value = OauthBearerMechanismConfig.class, name = "OAUTHBEARER"),
      @JsonSubTypes.Type(value = ScramMechanismConfig.class,        name = "SCRAM_SHA_256")
  })
  public sealed interface MechanismConfig
          permits OauthBearerMechanismConfig, ScramMechanismConfig {}

  public record OauthBearerMechanismConfig(URI tokenEndpoint, String clientId) implements MechanismConfig {}
  public record ScramMechanismConfig(String username, String password)           implements MechanismConfig {}

  @JsonInclude(JsonInclude.Include.NON_NULL)
  public record SaslAuthFilterConfig(
          @JsonProperty(required = true) List<MechanismConfig> mechanisms) {}
```

with YAML:
```yaml
    filterDefinitions:
    - name: my-sasl-filter
      type: SaslAuthFilter
      config:
        mechanisms:
          - type: OAUTHBEARER
            tokenEndpoint: https://auth.example.com/token
            clientId: my-client
          - type: SCRAM_SHA_256
            username: alice
            password: s3cr3t
```

with usage:

```java
  for (MechanismConfig mechanism : config.mechanisms()) {
      switch (mechanism) {
          case OauthBearerMechanismConfig c -> ...
          case ScramMechanismConfig c       -> ...
      }
  }
```

This gives you better error messages like if I make clientId required and then typo it:
```
Missing required creator property 'clientId' (index 1)
 at [Source: (StringReader); line: 5, column: 1] (through reference chain: io.kroxylicious.proxy.config.example.SaslAuthFilterConfig["mechanisms"]->java.util.ArrayList[0]->io.kroxylicious.proxy.config.example.OauthBearerMechanismConfig["clientId"])
```

We've shied away from dict semantics elsewhere where it would make some sense, like our definition lists, vs keying on the definition name. So there would be some consistency here.

One thing I think I've concluded playing with this is trying to build _some other mechanism_ that is integrated into the PluginLoading mechanism to allow Plugins to supply their own "non-service-loaded, sealed types" would be overkill, I think using jackson's built in constructs here makes more sense. (I think this is the kind of thing you were alluding to @SamBarker when you mentioned `@Plugin`s). It would feel odd to integrate with the framework plugin facilities just to build a class entirely owned by a particular plugin.

Author: Changed to `List<MechanismConfig>` with `@JsonTypeInfo(use = NAME, property = "mechanism")`. The mechanism field is the IANA-registered mechanism name. Claude suggested a specific Jackson mapping, which we can figure out when reviewing the actual code. The point is that from the YAML PoV it's a list now, with a `mechanism` property. Addressed in 49b49b8, 065079c.

#### Known limitations

- The filter does not support SASL PLAIN or GSSAPI (Kerberos). See [Rejected alternatives](#rejected-alternatives).

---

### Component 2: MechanismHandler internal extension point

#### Summary

The filter delegates the actual authentication exchange to mechanism-specific handlers, discovered via an internal extension point. This extension point provides internal extensibility for adding new mechanism support without modifying the filter itself.

These are **not** intended to be configurable by end uses (no `@Plugin` annotation). The intention behind this decision is to encourage a small number of secure, high-quality implementations, one for each mechanism. Allowing pluggable implementations would make auditing for correctness and security significantly harder.

#### API surfaces

The extension point consists of three types, all in the `io.kroxylicious.filter.sasl.termination.mechanism` package within the `kroxylicious-sasl-termination` module.

**`MechanismHandler`** -- handles the authentication exchange for a single connection. Instances are per-connection and not thread-safe.

> ```java

Reviewer: The name `MechanismHandler` doesn't convey what this component actually does. From Kroxylicious's perspective, the filter's job is to validate client credentials — whether that takes one round (OAUTHBEARER) or multiple (SCRAM) is an implementation detail of how the validation happens, not a different responsibility.

I understand "mechanism" comes from the SASL spec, but in our codebase the meaningful concept is credential validation. Something like `CredentialValidator` / `CredentialValidatorFactory` would make the role immediately clear to someone reading the code without SASL RFC context.

I'm also a bit wary of "Handler" given our Netty context — it invites confusion with `ChannelHandler`, which is a different thing entirely.

Author: The thing which defined and uses the `MechanismHandler` interface is the `SaslTermination` filter. That's the relevant perspective by which we should judge the suitability of names. From that PoV SASL is a given, and so using SASL specific terms, like 'mechanism', in named seems entirely appropriate.

I'm open to suggestions about 'handler'. 'Callback' is okayish, but doesn't _quite_ feel right given how it's used.

Reviewer: I still think naming in terms of roles (what the component *does*) rather than protocol concepts (where it *comes from*) would serve readers better, but I don't feel strongly enough to hold up the proposal. A few alternatives to "Handler" if you're open to it:

- `MechanismAuthenticator` — direct role-based, it authenticates
- `MechanismExchange` — leans into SASL spec language, one instance per connection maps to one exchange per connection
- `MechanismValidator` — what it ultimately decides: are these credentials valid?

For what it's worth, "Mechanism" feels redundant in the impl names — you already know it's SCRAM-SHA-256:

| Interface | Impl |
|-----------|------|
| `MechanismAuthenticator` | `ScramSha256Authenticator` |
| `MechanismExchange` | `ScramSha256Exchange` |
| `MechanismValidator` | `ScramSha256Validator` |

Author: Noted. If we drop the service loading part these are gonna be internal interfaces (not public API), so we're at liberty to decide when a code PR shows up.

public interface MechanismHandler {

    String mechanismName();

    CompletionStage<AuthenticationResult> handleAuthenticate(byte[] authBytes);

    void dispose();
}
```

**`MechanismHandlerFactory`** -- manages mechanism-specific resources and creates handler instances. Discovered via `ServiceLoader`.

```java

> public interface MechanismHandlerFactory extends AutoCloseable {

Reviewer: Could the lifecycle of `MechanismHandler` instances be clarified? The factory is virtual-cluster scoped and `createHandler()` creates per-connection instances, but:

1. **When is `dispose()` called?** On SUCCESS? On FAILURE? On connection close? All three?

2. **Reauthentication.** When an authenticated client sends a new SASL_HANDSHAKE (KIP-368), is the previous handler disposed before creating a new one?

It would help to have the handler lifecycle documented explicitly at the extension point level (Component 2) rather than having to infer it from the individual mechanism descriptions.

Author: Clarified the contract. Resolving this.

- **File permission enforcement.** On POSIX systems, the credential store refuses to load a KeyStore file that has group or world read/write permissions. This prevents accidental exposure through overly permissive file modes.

#### API surfaces

- Implements `ScramCredentialStoreService<KeystoreScramCredentialStoreConfig>` (from Component 5).
- Annotated with `@Plugin` for discovery by the Kroxylicious plugin system.

#### Configuration

The provider is configured via `KeystoreScramCredentialStoreConfig`:

| Option | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|--------|------|----------|---------|-------------|
| `file` | `String` | Yes | -- | Path to the Java KeyStore file. |
| `storePassword` | `PasswordProvider` | Yes | -- | Password provider for the KeyStore. In production, use file-based password (`file: /path/to/password.txt`). |
| `keyPassword` | `PasswordProvider` | No | value of `storePassword` | Password provider for individual keys within the KeyStore. Defaults to `storePassword` if not specified. |
| `storeType` | `String` | No | `KeyStore.getDefaultType()` | KeyStore type (e.g. `PKCS12`, `JKS`). Defaults to the JVM platform default. |

> #### CLI tool: `KeystoreCredentialTool`

Reviewer: The CLI tool (Component 6, "CLI tool: KeystoreCredentialTool") is a significant addition that I think needs more justification before we commit to it.

**Public API surface.** We'd treat CLI arguments and command structure with the same stability expectations as configuration files — this is a user-facing contract. That's five commands, each with their own option sets, exit codes, and security behaviours. That's a meaningful maintenance commitment on top of the filter itself.

**Is it necessary?** The motivation is that the KeyStore stores serialized JSON with computed SCRAM fields, making manual management error-prone. But that's an argument driven by the storage format choice — if the format were something that existing tooling (e.g. `keytool`) could manage natively, we might not need a bespoke CLI at all. Could we explore storage formats that don't require custom tooling?

**Why only SCRAM?** We don't provide CLI tooling for managing KMS keys or certificates — those backends come with their own management story. If a credential store backend needs bespoke CLI tooling to be usable, that's a signal that the backend might not be pulling its weight as an abstraction. The KMS pattern works precisely because the storage system handles its own management UX.

**Kubernetes.** Many Kroxylicious deployments will run on Kubernetes with read-only root filesystems. In that world, credentials typically arrive via Secrets mounted as volumes — you're not running a CLI tool against a live pod's filesystem. How does the KeyStore provider work in that model? And if the answer is "you run the CLI tool outside the cluster and mount the result," doesn't that make the POSIX permission checks (which are a key part of the security story) moot, since the mounted Secret's permissions are controlled by the kubelet?

I can see there's some merit in providing tooling for credential management, but the applicability feels very niche. I think the CLI tool deserves its own proposal where these questions can be explored properly, rather than riding in as a sub-component of the filter design.

Author: A lot of the choices here are forced on us by a) wanting to support SCRAM and b) how SCRAM works.

**Is it necessary?** Yes. SCRAM credentials contain computed fields (`serverKey`, `storedKey` derived via PBKDF2 from the password). `keytool` can't generate those. I'm not aware of any tooling which can. Without tooling, users would need to manually compute PBKDF2 derivations and construct JSON, which would be error-prone and insecure.

**Why only SCRAM?** For the KMSes those external services give us something we can delegate the management UX to. That's not the case for SCRAM. Likewise other CLI tools like `keytool` or `openssl`: They don't understand the structure of SCRAM credentials, because SCRAM is only defined in terms of the protocol and it seems no one has tried to standardize any tooling for the credential material (unlike, say, X509 certificates, which existed and were standardize before SSL was defined).

**Separate proposal** Supporting SCRAM requires a way to securely handle the credentials. So it's a bit pointless to try to shove the CLI tooling into a separate proposal if you can't use SCRAM without it -- you might as well shove the whole SCRAM `MechanismHandler` into a separate proposal. Perhaps we should do that, but it doesn't reduce the amount of work needed to actually deliver SCRAM. So are you asking that we drop SCRAM entirely for now, so as to expedite `OAUTHBEARER`?

---

**Kubernetes:** You're right to ask about this, and there's a genuine tension going on here. I don't think the need to support running on Kubernetes and OpenShift should be a reason to water down security when running elsewhere. So having some kind of permission check is reasonable. 

On OpenShift with the restricted-v2 SCC:
- The container runs as an arbitrary UID allocated from the namespace's UID range
- Secret volume files are typically owned by root (UID 0)
- So `defaultMode: 0400` means `-r--------` owned by root, thus the container process (running as a different UID) can't read the file

In https://github.com/kroxylicious/design/pull/121 @piotrpdev is proposing a configurable mode to relax a check which he proposes should be applied to all keystores. But having that configurable be in the config file creates a bootstrapping problem. I think we could actually use an env var, with an obviously scary name, like `KROXYLICIOUS_DANGEROUSLY_CHANGE_PERMISSION_CHECK`. When that's unset we'd require `0600`. It could be set to `0640` on OpenShift and Kubernetes (i.e. in the PodSpec, controlled by the `kroxylicious-operator`) to allow group-readable files. That should mean bootstrapping was secure and it would still work if/when we add support for secret rotation. The trust chain is: operator → pod spec → env var → policy (with no writable config file in the loop).

Reviewer: I'm not suggesting we drop SCRAM or defer work. I don't know how you managed to infer that from my comment. I'm questioning why the credential management UX is different from what users already know and if that is enough justification to expand the public API scope of the project.

Users deploying SCRAM on Kafka today manage credentials via `kafka-configs.sh` / the `AlterUserScramCredentials` Admin API. The need for a bespoke CLI tool here is driven by the KeyStore storage format choice, to which I think you have answered, yes we require a custom format. However that doesn't mean we have to require users to work with brand new tools. Why should an operator need to learn a different tool and workflow to manage proxy credentials when they already have one for broker credentials?

Author: Using the Admin API would require a proxy control plane, so that all the proxy instances would end up using the same credentials. It would also require some persistent storage, if you wanted the credentials to survive a restart. That's not really a viable alternative.

**`SASL_HANDSHAKE`** — Accepted in the initial (unauthenticated) state and in the authenticated state (for reauthentication). The client names its chosen mechanism. If the mechanism is supported, the filter transitions to the authenticating state. If the mechanism is not supported, the filter responds with `UNSUPPORTED_SASL_MECHANISM` and the list of supported mechanisms; the state does not change and the client may retry with a different mechanism. If the request arrives with an API version outside the range known to the filter, the request is rejected and the connection is closed — this prevents a future protocol version from bypassing the filter's security logic.

**`SASL_AUTHENTICATE`** — Accepted only in the authenticating state. The filter delegates to internal per-mechanism logic. For multi-round mechanisms (e.g. SCRAM), the exchange loops with challenge responses until it completes. On success, the filter calls `filterContext.clientSaslAuthenticationSuccess(mechanism, subject)` to propagate the authenticated identity to downstream filters. On failure, the connection is closed. As with `SASL_HANDSHAKE`, unknown API versions are rejected and the connection is closed.

> **All other requests** — Accepted only after authentication succeeds. If the client has not authenticated, the request is rejected with `SASL_AUTHENTICATION_FAILED` and the connection is closed. If the session has expired (see [Reauthentication](#reauthentication-kip-368)), the same happens. In practice, the pre-authentication rejection should never be reached for non-SASL requests because failed authentication already closes the connection; the check exists for defence in depth.

Reviewer 2: an edge case is session expiry while we have a request in flight, do we allow a response under these circumstances to be sent to the client?

Author: I think elsewhere the propsal says we'll deliver responses to request made before the session expired. But @SamBarker raised kroxylicious/kroxylicious#4493, so there's a gap.

#### API surfaces

The filter is a standard Kroxylicious `FilterFactory` plugin. It does not define any new public API. It uses:

- `FilterFactory<SaslTerminationConfig>` (from `kroxylicious-api`) -- the standard filter factory contract.
- `RequestFilter` (from `kroxylicious-api`) -- for intercepting requests.
- `FilterContext.clientSaslAuthenticationSuccess()` / `clientSaslAuthenticationFailure()` (from `kroxylicious-api`, added by Proposal 006) -- to propagate authentication outcomes.

#### Configuration

The filter is configured via `SaslTerminationConfig`:

| Option | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|--------|------|----------|---------|-------------|
| `mechanisms` | `List` | Yes | -- | List of mechanism configurations. Each entry includes a `mechanism` field (the IANA-registered mechanism name, e.g. `SCRAM-SHA-256`, `OAUTHBEARER`) and mechanism-specific configuration. At least one entry is required. |
| `maxTimeBeforeReauth` | `Duration` | No | disabled | Maximum session lifetime before reauthentication is required (KIP-368). Uses golang-style duration syntax (e.g. `1h`, `30m`, `1h30m`). Omit or set to `0` to disable. |

> | `fixedAuthDelay` | `Duration` | No | `200ms` | Fixed delay applied to all authentication rounds to prevent timing side-channel attacks that could enable user enumeration. Set to `0` to disable if the deployment's threat model does not require user enumeration protection. |

Reviewer: The description says a "fixed delay applied to all authentication rounds" which reads as additive (response time = auth duration + delay). I'm presuming from the metric definition (which excludes the delay) and the WARN when auth duration exceeds it that it's actually a floor (response time = max(auth duration, delay)). Could the description make that clearer?

Author: Sure.

And I actually think applying it to all rounds is not sufficient to guard against the threat of a timing attack: We need a not-found user name to not fail-fast on the first round, but to lead the client into the 2nd round. But we're in the weeds here: This can wait till we're reviewing the code.

Author: Addressed in 73ef2ab.

- **No credential store required.** OAUTHBEARER is architecturally simpler than SCRAM — the only external dependency is the JWKS endpoint, and authentication is typically single-round (client sends token, server validates it).

**Key differences from the existing OAUTHBEARER validation filter:**
- The existing validation filter validates tokens then _forwards_ the SASL exchange to the broker. It is fundamentally a SASL passthrough technique. In contrast, SASL termination validates tokens and _short-circuits_ — the broker never sees a SASL exchange.

#### API surfaces

OAUTHBEARER mechanism support does not use the `ScramCredentialStore` SPI. Token validation is performed entirely by Kafka's `OAuthBearerValidatorCallbackHandler`.

#### Configuration

The OAUTHBEARER mechanism is configured within the filter's `mechanisms` list with the following options:

| Option | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|--------|------|----------|---------|-------------|

> | `jwksEndpointUrl` | `URI` | Yes | -- | URL of the JWKS endpoint for fetching token signing keys. |

Reviewer 2: maybe we'd need custom TLS config here, can be added later

Author: Yes, we should have TLS in all the places. But yes, later.

- **File permission enforcement.** On POSIX systems, the credential store refuses to load a KeyStore file that has group or world read/write permissions. This prevents accidental exposure through overly permissive file modes.

#### API surfaces

- Implements `ScramCredentialStoreService<KeystoreScramCredentialStoreConfig>` (from Component 4).
- Annotated with `@Plugin` for discovery by the Kroxylicious plugin system.

#### Configuration

The provider is configured via `KeystoreScramCredentialStoreConfig`:

| Option | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|--------|------|----------|---------|-------------|
| `file` | `String` | Yes | -- | Path to the Java KeyStore file. |
| `storePassword` | `PasswordProvider` | Yes | -- | Password provider for the KeyStore. In production, use file-based password (`file: /path/to/password.txt`). |
| `keyPassword` | `PasswordProvider` | No | value of `storePassword` | Password provider for individual keys within the KeyStore. Defaults to `storePassword` if not specified. |
| `storeType` | `String` | No | `KeyStore.getDefaultType()` | KeyStore type (e.g. `PKCS12`, `JKS`). Defaults to the JVM platform default. |

> #### CLI tool: `KeystoreCredentialTool`

Reviewer 2: What kind of API guarantees do we want this script to have, is it public API that people will be able to rely on having a stable API?

Author: Yes it's public API: We shouldn't go removing options etc without deprecations and warnings etc.

| `-u`, `--username` | Yes | — | Username to update. |
| `-p`, `--password` | No | interactive prompt | KeyStore password. Requires `--unlock-insecure-options`. |
| `-w`, `--new-password` | No | interactive prompt | New password for the user. Requires `--unlock-insecure-options`. |
| `-m`, `--mechanism` | No | `SCRAM_SHA_256` | SCRAM mechanism (`SCRAM_SHA_256`, `SCRAM_SHA_512`). |

```
keystore-credential-tool list-users -k <path> [-p <password>]
```

List all usernames in the KeyStore.

| Option | Required | Default | Description |
|--------|----------|---------|-------------|
| `-k`, `--keystore` | Yes | — | Path to the KeyStore file. |
| `-p`, `--password` | No | interactive prompt | KeyStore password. Requires `--unlock-insecure-options`. |

**Exit codes:** `0` = success, `1` = operation error, `2` = password/security error.

**Security measures:**
- Passwords are read via interactive console prompts by default because passing secrets via CLI arguments is insecure (they appear in shell history and process listings). Command-line password arguments are supported but gated behind an `--unlock-insecure-options` flag that displays security warnings.

> - A 12-character minimum password length is enforced, following [NIST SP 800-63B][nist-sp800-63b] guidance.

Reviewer 2: bob suggested also adding a max limit to prevent PBKDF2 being a DOS vector, I had a go locally and it doesn't seem super slow even with a 50MB password input, taking ~0.1 seconds. But I guess there could still be an argument for capping it at something like 512 or 1024 just to cut off any attacks early.

Author: Seems reasonable.

Author: Rather than capping password length (which doesn't help much because the proxy would never receive the raw password in SCRAM, and stored credentials are fixed-size hashes), I've added more targeted input size limits. Per-mechanism `authBytes` upper bounds:

* Username length capped at 255.
* 4KB for SCRAM (legitimate messages are a few hundred bytes), 
* 128KB for OAUTHBEARER (accommodates large enterprise JWTs). 

Enforced in both the SCRAM handler and the CLI tool. Addressed in 882ec44.

> - SCRAM credentials are generated with 10,000 PBKDF2 iterations and 20 bytes of random salt. The [RFC 5802][rfc5802] minimum is 4,096 (which is also the Kafka broker default). The [OWASP Password Storage Cheat Sheet][owasp-password-storage] currently recommends 600,000 iterations for PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256, but that guidance targets password storage hashing where derivation happens once at write time. In SCRAM, the client performs the derivation on every authentication, so the iteration count directly affects authentication latency. 10,000 provides a reasonable balance between brute-force resistance and authentication performance for Kafka's typically long-lived connections.

Reviewer: Kafka connections are long-lived, so the performance argument for capping at 10,000 iterations is weaker than it would be for a typical web authentication flow. Should the iteration count be configurable rather than fixed?

Author: Yes, I don't mind making it configurable.

- On POSIX systems, newly created KeyStore files are set to owner-only permissions (`rw-------`). When loading an existing KeyStore for modification (`add-user`, `remove-user`, `update-password`, `list-users`), the tool checks that the file does not have group or world read/write permissions and refuses to proceed if it does.

#### Threats and mitigations

> | Threat | Mitigation |

Reviewer: The threats table covers credential store theft (file exposure), but doesn't address what happens next — offline brute-force. If an attacker exfiltrates the credential store, the iteration count is the main defence against offline dictionary/brute-force attacks on the stored credentials. With 10,000 iterations and modern GPU hardware, that bar isn't particularly high. This seems worth calling out as a threat — with the mitigation being a configurable iteration count (so operators can raise it) plus the existing file permission checks that reduce the likelihood of exfiltration in the first place.

Author: I'll add this as a potential threat. 

Just FTR, I'm going to quote Claude for a bit of background on where the 10,000 number is not the the 600,000 number in OWASP's recommendation. I know you're not suggesting the 600,000 number, Sam, but I think it's informative about the tradeoff between brute force protection vs latency:

>   The core difference: who pays the cost and when
>
> With traditional password hashing (what OWASP's 600,000 recommendation targets), PBKDF2
  runs once on the server when the password is stored, and once more on the server when
  verifying a login. The cost is paid server-side and only at login time. Making this
  slow is essentially free — the user waits an extra 100ms once.
>
> With SCRAM, PBKDF2 runs on the client on every new connection. The server sends the
  salt and iteration count in the server-first-message, and the client must compute
  SaltedPassword = PBKDF2(password, salt, iterations) before it can construct its proof.
  This happens on every connection establishment, every reconnection, and every
  reauthentication (KIP-368). The iteration count directly becomes authentication
  latency.
>

If you had a low powered Kafka client needing to make connections to many leaders you can see that the latency might become a problem.

> Why 600,000 doesn't apply
>
> OWASP's recommendation is calibrated to add ~100ms of server-side latency per
  authentication. 

Note how, when the cost is entirely server-side, the admin can calibrate the number of iterations to their machine to hit 100ms. When the cost is client side it's somewhere between harder to impossible for the admin to know what the right number is.

> That's fine for password-at-rest hashing where derivation happens once
  at write time and once at verification. But in SCRAM:
> - Kafka's default is 4,096 iterations (the RFC 5802
  (https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5802) minimum)
> - The client bears the CPU cost, not the server
> - Environments with many connections, reconnections, or reauthentication cycles
  multiply this cost
>
> Why 10,000 is a reasonable choice
>
> 10,000 is ~2.5x Kafka's default of 4,096. It provides meaningfully more brute-force
  resistance than the Kafka default while remaining well within acceptable authentication
  latency for Kafka's typically long-lived connections. Going to 600,000 would make
  every connection establishment take seconds on the client side — untenable for Kafka
  workloads.

I'm not sure I'd go as far as "untenable", Claude.

>
> What PBKDF2 actually protects in SCRAM
>
> Sam's second comment is about what happens after credential store theft. He's right
  that the iteration count is the main defence there. But it's worth noting that SCRAM's
  stored verifier (StoredKey + ServerKey) is not directly sufficient to impersonate a
  client
  (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salted_Challenge_Response_Authentication_Mechanism) — an
  attacker needs the pre-image (ClientKey). The iteration count protects against offline
  brute-force recovery of the original password from the stolen verifier, same as any
  password hash. The file permission checks (https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5802)
  reduce the likelihood of exfiltration in the first place.
>
> That said, the "Against SCRAM" critique by slingamn
  (https://gist.github.com/slingamn/3f2fed196df5ef14d1316a1ffa9d59f8) is correct that a
  captured SCRAM transcript (from eavesdropping without TLS) has the same sensitivity as
  a stored password hash — so TLS is essential.

Author: Made configurable in 57bdfe1. Added `--iterations` option to `add-user` and `update-password` (default 10,000, minimum 4,096). Also updated `list-users` to show mechanism and iteration count per entry so operators can audit existing credentials. Addressed

Added as a threat in the Component 5 threats table in 8990b0b.

- Integrating with identity providers that don't have native Kafka client support.

### Zero-trust edge authentication

In a zero-trust architecture the proxy can enforce authentication at the network edge before any Kafka protocol traffic reaches brokers. Unauthenticated clients are rejected immediately, reducing the broker's attack surface.

### Centralized credential management

The credential store is per-filter-instance. Clients of multiple brokers authenticate against a shared credential store, rather than requiring per-broker credential configuration. Combined with the proxy's existing plugin system, this allows integration with enterprise credential stores.

### Broker-less authentication

A key problem with any passthrough-based technique is that it depends on the availability of a specific Kafka cluster. With the advent of the routing API described by [Proposal 072][proposal-072] there is a need to be able to authenticate a client session before a connection has been made to any target cluster. This is unavoidable because the identity of the client might be an input to the subsequent routing decisions.

## Proposal

> 

Reviewer 3: The proposal doesn't consider delegation tokens, so as things stand, the admin client could create an delegation token which would belong to an upstream cluster, but that would be useless to a client.  Delegation tokens would required state of be shared amongst the proxy replicas.

I think this proposal needs to call out that delegation tokens are out of scope.  I think that's okay as delegation tokens are niche.  The filter should probably remove the delegation APIs from the API_VERSIONS response and fail API calls like create delegation token in a defined way.

Author: Agreed. Delegation tokens are now called out as unsupported — the filter removes apiKeys 38-41 from `API_VERSIONS` and rejects those request types. Future support may be possible via `DescribeDelegationToken`, which does expose the token HMAC. Addressed in 57ef3f9.

This proposal aims to support the following SASL mechanisms: `SCRAM-SHA-256`, `SCRAM-SHA-512` and `OAUTHBEARER`.
It also aims to be flexible, so as to allow other mechanisms to be supported in the future.

The proposal is organized per-component. Each component section covers its summary, API surfaces, configuration, threats and mitigations, and known limitations.

### Component overview

> The `SaslTerminationFilter` (Component 1) intercepts SASL requests and manages per-connection authentication state via a sealed state machine. It delegates the actual authentication exchange to mechanism-specific `MechanismHandler` instances (Component 2), created per-connection by `MechanismHandlerFactory` implementations discovered via ServiceLoader. The OAUTHBEARER handler factory (Component 4) validates JWT tokens against a JWKS endpoint. The SCRAM handler factories (Component 3) use a `ScramCredentialStore` (Component 5) to look up stored credentials — a public SPI with a first-party KeyStore-backed provider (Component 6).

Reviewer: The motivation is sound, but I think the proposal should acknowledge the operational implications of credential isolation for SCRAM.

1. **No integration with existing user management.** Strimzi's `KafkaUser` CR, `kafka-configs.sh`, and any other tooling that manages SCRAM credentials via the Kafka Admin API all write to Kafka's credential store. The proxy can't use those credentials — `DescribeUserScramCredentials` doesn't expose the key material. So none of the existing ecosystem tooling works with the proxy's credential store.

2. **Difficult migration for existing SCRAM deployments.** Operators who already have SCRAM users on their brokers can't migrate those credentials to the proxy. They'd need to re-provision every user in the proxy's store from scratch.

This isn't blocking — credential isolation is explicitly a goal, and these implications follow directly from it. But the proposal should be upfront about what operators are signing up for.

Author: Acknowledged in the proposal — added an operational trade-off note under Credential Isolation. Also: `AlterUserScramCredentials` is removed from API_VERSIONS and request rejected is made since the credential store SPI is intentionally read-only. `DescribeUserScramCredentials` can be answered by the filter from its own store. Addressed in dd9d3e8, 52b5c90, 7125ce8.

> The `SaslTerminationFilter` (Component 1) intercepts SASL requests and manages per-connection authentication state via a sealed state machine. It delegates the actual authentication exchange to mechanism-specific `MechanismHandler` instances (Component 2), created per-connection by `MechanismHandlerFactory` implementations discovered via ServiceLoader. The OAUTHBEARER handler factory (Component 4) validates JWT tokens against a JWKS endpoint. The SCRAM handler factories (Component 3) use a `ScramCredentialStore` (Component 5) to look up stored credentials — a public SPI with a first-party KeyStore-backed provider (Component 6).

Reviewer: SASL termination splits authentication into two independent exchanges: client-to-proxy and proxy-to-broker. In passthrough mode these are the same exchange, so a failure is immediate and visible to the client. With termination, the filter reports `clientSaslAuthenticationSuccess` and the client starts producing/consuming — but the proxy's own authentication to the broker can fail independently.

This creates a new failure mode: the operator sees healthy client-auth metrics but nothing works. The client authenticated successfully against the proxy's credential store, but the proxy can't reach the broker because its own credentials are wrong, expired, or misconfigured.

I think the proposal should discuss this gap — what does the client see when the proxy can authenticate it but can't authenticate itself upstream? How does an operator diagnose the disconnect between successful client auth and a broken system?

Author: Thanks, that's a great observation. 

From the client side I think it's desirable for the failure response should be indistinguishable from a terminated auth failure so an attacker can't determine which part failed. 

That would mean we need to verify upstream auth before reporting success to the client, which is going to be complex. The filter would either 
* need to coordinate with a separate `SaslInitiator` filter (and we don't have one of those right now), 
* or it would need to function as a `SaslInitiator` itself (which is a significant increase in complexity). The broker connection may not even use SASL. 

The former seems preferable to me, but it would take some thinking through if we really wanted to attempt that. 

Another option is to not attempt to solve this for the initial implementation: It's up to the administrator to provision broker-side authentication correctly, and if that fails then we just end up disconnecting the client (after it thought its authentication had succeeded). The overall UX would be poorer, and a bad actor might be able to infer something (e.g. the presence of the proxy, that the problem was in the backend authentication), but it would not be insecure.

I've added an open question in 7999a8b. I'm leaning towards not solving this right now, but this is something we should get a consensus on.

    }

    namespace CredentialStoreSPI {
        class ScramCredentialStore {
            <<interface>>
            +lookupCredential(String) CompletionStage~ScramCredential~
        }
        class ScramCredentialStoreService~C~ {
            <<interface>>
            +initialize(C)
            +buildCredentialStore() ScramCredentialStore
        }
        class ScramCredential {
            <<record>>
        }
    }

    namespace KeystoreProvider {
        class KeystoreScramCredentialStoreService {
            <<Plugin>>
        }
    }

    SaslTerminationFilter *-- State
    SaslTerminationFilter ..> MechanismHandlerFactory : discovers via ServiceLoader
    MechanismHandlerFactory --> MechanismHandler : creates per connection
    MechanismHandler --> AuthenticationResult : returns
    MechanismHandlerFactory ..> MechanismConfig : configured by
    MechanismHandler ..> ScramCredentialStore : looks up credentials (SCRAM)

    ScramCredentialStoreService --> ScramCredentialStore : builds
    ScramCredentialStore --> ScramCredential : returns
    KeystoreScramCredentialStoreService ..|> ScramCredentialStoreService
```

### Component 1: SaslTermination filter

#### Summary

> The `SaslTermination` filter is a `@Plugin`-annotated `FilterFactory` that intercepts `SASL_HANDSHAKE` and `SASL_AUTHENTICATE` requests, authenticating clients at the proxy and short-circuiting the responses without forwarding them to the broker. Multiple mechanisms are configured within a single filter instance because the Kafka SASL protocol requires it: the client sends a `SaslHandshakeRequest` naming its chosen mechanism, and the server responds with the set of supported mechanisms. A filter-per-mechanism model would not work because no single filter would have the complete set of supported mechanisms to advertise in the `SaslHandshakeResponse`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SaslTermination filter is a `@Plugin`-annotated `FilterFactory` that intercepts all requests on a connection. For `SASL_HANDSHAKE` and `SASL_AUTHENTICATE` requests, it authenticates clients at the proxy, short-circuiting those exchanges without forwarding them to the broker. For every other request type, the filter enforces access: if the client has not completed authentication, the request is rejected and the connection is closed; if the session lifetime has elapsed, the filter does the same, requiring the client to reauthenticate. Multiple mechanisms are configured within a single filter instance because the Kafka SASL protocol requires it: the client sends a `SaslHandshakeRequest` naming its chosen mechanism, and the server responds with the set of supported mechanisms. A filter-per-mechanism model would not work because no single filter would have the complete set of supported mechanisms to advertise in the `SaslHandshakeResponse`.
```

I found this summary a little bit in conflict with later descriptions of how things like expiry work, we should put it in mind immediately that it intercepts everything.

Author: Rewritten to make clear the filter intercepts all requests (though I might rewrite this section anyway, just to break it down by apiKey). Non-SASL requests are checked for authentication state and session expiry as defence in depth. The unauthenticated rejection should never be reached since failed auth already closes the connection. Addressed in ea0cf09.

Key features:

> - **Security barrier.** Until a client has successfully authenticated, the only requests permitted are `API_VERSIONS`, `SASL_HANDSHAKE`, and `SASL_AUTHENTICATE`. All other request types are rejected with `SASL_AUTHENTICATION_FAILED` and the connection is closed.

Reviewer 3: As this filter is security sensitive, we should fail closed if either the SASL_HANDSHAKE or SASL_AUTHENTICATE version is outside the range known to the filter.

Author: Addressed in b58daf1.

- **State machine.** Per-connection authentication state is modelled as a sealed interface with four concrete states, preventing invalid transitions at compile time.
- **Reauthentication (KIP-368).** When `maxTimeBeforeReauth` is configured, the filter includes a `sessionLifetimeMs` value in `SaslAuthenticateResponse` (v1+), informing the client when to reauthenticate. Sessions that expire without reauthentication are rejected and closed.
- **Mechanism dispatch.** The filter delegates each authentication exchange to a `MechanismHandler` obtained from the appropriate `MechanismHandlerFactory` (see Component 2). The filter itself is mechanism-agnostic.

#### State machine

The filter maintains per-connection state using a sealed interface `State` with four concrete states:

| From state | Triggering event | To state |
|------------|------------------|----------|

> | **RequiringHandshake** | `SASL_HANDSHAKE` with supported mechanism | **RequiringAuthenticate** |

Reviewer 2: might be worth adding the unsupported mechanism case stating we remain in `RequiringHandshake` and returns `UNSUPPORTED_SASL_MECHANISM` with supported list. Which looks like what's in the PoC

Reviewer 3: +1

| **RequiringAuthenticate** | `SASL_AUTHENTICATE` → handler returns `CHALLENGE` | **RequiringAuthenticate** (loop) |

> | **RequiringAuthenticate** | `SASL_AUTHENTICATE` → handler returns `SUCCESS` | **Authenticated** |

Reviewer: What happens when an authenticated client sends an `AlterUserScramCredentials` or `DescribeUserScramCredentials` request through the proxy?

If the proxy is terminating SASL, it owns the credential store. These requests are only meaningful to the proxy now — forwarding them to the broker would be wrong (the broker's credentials are irrelevant if clients never authenticate against it). So the filter needs to intercept them. Does it apply them to its own store? Reject them? Either way, they shouldn't be passed through.

This also has implications for the CLI tooling question — if the filter intercepts `AlterUserScramCredentials`, operators could manage proxy credentials using standard Kafka admin tooling (`kafka-configs.sh`) rather than a bespoke CLI.

Author: Covered by the credential isolation response above. See 52b5c90, 7125ce8.

**Server-side enforcement:** If the session has expired and a non-SASL request arrives, the filter rejects it with `SASL_AUTHENTICATION_FAILED` and closes the connection. `API_VERSIONS`, `SASL_HANDSHAKE` and `SASL_AUTHENTICATE` requests are always accepted regardless of session expiry — `API_VERSIONS` is handled unconditionally before the state machine, and the SASL requests allow reauthentication.

#### API surfaces

The filter is a standard Kroxylicious `FilterFactory` plugin. It does not define any new public API. It uses:

- `FilterFactory<SaslTerminationConfig>` (from `kroxylicious-api`) -- the standard filter factory contract.
- `RequestFilter` (from `kroxylicious-api`) -- for intercepting requests.
- `FilterContext.clientSaslAuthenticationSuccess()` / `clientSaslAuthenticationFailure()` (from `kroxylicious-api`, added by Proposal 006) -- to propagate authentication outcomes.
- `MechanismHandlerFactory` (internal, see Component 2) -- for mechanism dispatch.

#### Configuration

The filter is configured via `SaslTerminationConfig`:

| Option | Type | Required | Default | Description |
|--------|------|----------|---------|-------------|

> | `mechanisms` | `Map<String, MechanismConfig>` | Yes | -- | Map of IANA-registered mechanism name to mechanism-specific configuration. At least one entry is required. |

Reviewer 3: I think we want to accept a nullable SaslSubjectBuilderService which defaults to DEFAULT_SUBJECT_BUILDER like SaslInspection already does.

Author: Added as an optional config field defaulting to `DEFAULT_SUBJECT_BUILDER`, consistent with `SaslInspection`. Addressed in b933526.

**Example configuration:**

```yaml
filters:
  - type: SaslTermination
    config:
      maxTimeBeforeReauth: 1h
      fixedAuthDelay: 200ms
      mechanisms:
        SCRAM-SHA-256:
          credentialStore: KeystoreScramCredentialStoreService
          credentialStoreConfig:
            file: /path/to/credentials.p12
            storePassword:
              file: /etc/kroxylicious/keystore-password.txt
            storeType: PKCS12
        OAUTHBEARER:
          jwksEndpointUrl: https://idp.example.com/.well-known/jwks.json
          expectedAudience: kafka
          expectedIssuer: https://idp.example.com
```

#### Threats and mitigations

| Threat | Mitigation |
|--------|------------|
| Unauthenticated request bypass -- a client sends Kafka protocol requests (Produce, Fetch, etc.) before completing SASL authentication. | The security barrier rejects all non-SASL request types until the state reaches `Authenticated`. Rejected requests receive `SASL_AUTHENTICATION_FAILED` and the connection is closed immediately. |

> | Session expiry evasion -- an authenticated client continues sending requests after its session has expired without reauthenticating. | On every non-SASL request in the `Authenticated` state, the filter checks whether the session has expired. If so, the request is rejected with `SASL_AUTHENTICATION_FAILED` and the connection is closed. `SASL_HANDSHAKE` / `SASL_AUTHENTICATE` are always permitted, allowing reauthentication. |

Reviewer 2: on this, I see in your PoC this logic is always applied. In the computed expiry=0 (no-expiry) + `AUTHENTICATED` state would we be able to avoid deserializing everything, using shouldHandleRequest?

Author: Seems reasonable. Addressed in c6a3dbf.

---

### Component 2: MechanismHandler internal extension point

#### Summary

The filter delegates the actual authentication exchange to mechanism-specific handlers, discovered via an internal extension point. This extension point provides internal extensibility for adding new mechanism support without modifying the filter itself.

These are **not** intended to be configurable by end uses (no `@Plugin` annotation). The intention behind this decision is to encourage a small number of secure, high-quality implementations, one for each mechanism. Allowing pluggable implementations would make auditing for correctness and security significantly harder.

#### API surfaces

The extension point consists of three types, all in the `io.kroxylicious.filter.sasl.termination.mechanism` package within the `kroxylicious-sasl-termination` module.

**`MechanismHandler`** -- handles the authentication exchange for a single connection. Instances are per-connection and not thread-safe.

```java
public interface MechanismHandler {

    String mechanismName();

    CompletionStage<AuthenticationResult> handleAuthenticate(byte[] authBytes);

    void dispose();
}
```

> **`MechanismHandler` lifecycle:** The filter calls `dispose()` on the handler after SUCCESS (the handler is no longer needed once the client is authenticated) and after FAILURE (the connection is about to close). It is *not* called on raw connection close (e.g. client disconnects mid-exchange) because the `Filter` API has no connection-close hook — the handler becomes unreachable and is garbage collected. Handler implementations must therefore not hold resources that require explicit cleanup beyond what GC provides.

Reviewer 3: > Handler implementations must therefore not hold resources that require explicit cleanup beyond what GC provides.

Did we check the that Kafka SaslServer implementations we will rely on have this quality?

Author: Kafka's `ScramSaslServer.dispose()` is (currently) a no-op. Addressed in bc3294a. We might want to consider whether `Filter` should have a `close()` method, but not in this proposal.

| SCRAM protocol correctness -- a bug in the SCRAM implementation could allow authentication bypass or credential leakage. | Delegated to Kafka's own `SaslServer`, which is widely deployed and well-tested. The handler is responsible only for credential lookup and passing credentials to the `SaslServer` via a `CallbackHandler`. |

#### Known limitations

- **SCRAM channel binding not supported.** [RFC 5802 Section 6][rfc5802-s6] describes channel binding for SCRAM. Kafka does not use SCRAM channel binding, so this implementation follows Kafka's approach and does not implement it.

---

> ### Component 4: OAUTHBEARER mechanism handler

Reviewer 2: In the PoC the oauth handler factory is manipulating the `org.apache.kafka.sasl.oauthbearer.allowed.urls` system property as part of the interaction with the apache kafka components, I think this is worth calling out somewhere as a challenge of integrating with the kafka internals and why we diverge from using our own sys prop or other proxy-wide configuration.

> #### Summary

Reviewer: SCRAM gets a full pluggable credential store (separate module, `@Plugin` discovery, `ScramCredentialStoreService` lifecycle), but OAUTHBEARER hardcodes its validation into the handler. The known limitations section already acknowledges the hardcoded `BrokerJwtValidator` as a limitation — which suggests the current design is already bumping up against the lack of an abstraction boundary.

A `TokenValidator` SPI would be a simple, symmetric abstraction: token string in, validation result out (valid/invalid, authorizationId, sessionLifetimeMs). The JWKS-based implementation wrapping Kafka's `OAuthBearerValidatorCallbackHandler` becomes the first-party provider, and the door is open for token introspection (RFC 7662) or custom claim validators without modifying the handler.

Is there a reason OAUTHBEARER shouldn't get the same pluggable treatment as SCRAM?

Author: In principle I agree with you. I practice I think this proposal is already way too big. So to manage the scope I've noted it as planned future work in the OAUTHBEARER known limitations. Addressed in e29723a.

| `scopeClaimName` | `String` | No | `"scope"` | JWT claim name containing the scope. |
| `subClaimName` | `String` | No | `"sub"` | JWT claim name containing the subject. |
| `jwksEndpointRefreshMs` | `Long` | No | Kafka default | Interval in milliseconds between JWKS endpoint refreshes. |
| `jwksEndpointRetryBackoffMs` | `Long` | No | Kafka default | Initial retry backoff in milliseconds when the JWKS endpoint is unreachable. |
| `jwksEndpointRetryBackoffMaxMs` | `Long` | No | Kafka default | Maximum retry backoff in milliseconds. |

**Security note:** `expectedAudience` and `expectedIssuer` are both required. Without audience validation, a token issued for a different service would be accepted; without issuer validation, tokens from any issuer whose keys happen to be in the JWKS would be accepted.

#### Threats and mitigations

| Threat | Mitigation |
|--------|------------|
| Token from wrong audience or issuer -- a JWT issued for a different service or identity provider is presented to the proxy. | Both `expectedAudience` and `expectedIssuer` are required fields. The handler rejects tokens that do not match. |

> | JWKS endpoint compromise -- an attacker controls the JWKS endpoint and supplies signing keys for forged tokens. | Mitigated operationally: the JWKS endpoint URL is set by the proxy administrator, not by clients. TLS protects the endpoint in transit (using the JVM's default trust store). |

Reviewer 2: something claude picked out of your PoC is that we should be careful with logging or returning error messages to the client which could contain details like "JWT expired at...", "wrong audience", or "wrong issuer" . Giving the client information about whether they've got the right IdP but wrong claims and so on could be a risk. Similar to scram I think these should be hidden behind a generic "Authentication failed".

Author: Added to the OAUTHBEARER threats table: the filter returns a generic "Authentication failed" to the client, matching the SCRAM approach. Addressed in 2e29fe2.

#### Known limitations

- **No TLS configuration for the JWKS endpoint.** Kafka's `OAuthBearerValidatorCallbackHandler` uses an internal HTTP client with no TLS configuration surface. There is no way to configure custom trust stores or client certificates for HTTPS communication with the JWKS endpoint. The JVM's default trust store is used. This limitation is inherited from Kafka's callback handler and shared with the existing OAUTHBEARER validation filter.
- **No rate limiting.** The handler does not implement rate limiting or brute-force protection for failed authentication attempts. The existing OAUTHBEARER validation filter has Caffeine-based rate limiting with exponential backoff that could serve as a reference for a future implementation.
- **Hardcoded `BrokerJwtValidator`.** The handler hardcodes `BrokerJwtValidator` as the JWT validator. The existing OAUTHBEARER validation filter allows this to be overridden via `jwtValidatorClass` for custom claim validation logic.

---

### Component 5: ScramCredentialStore SPI (public plugin API)

#### Summary

> The `ScramCredentialStore` SPI, defined in the `kroxylicious-sasl-credential-store` module, is the user-facing plugin API for SCRAM credential store providers. It provides asynchronous credential lookup decoupled from any particular storage backend.

Reviewer: The pluggable `ScramCredentialStoreService` SPI opens an interesting question: is there mileage in separately investigating a credential store backed by Kafka's `__cluster_metadata` topic?

The `UserScramCredentialRecord` (metadata apiKey 11) contains the full credential material — `Salt`, `StoredKey`, `ServerKey`, `Iterations`. A `MetadataTopicScramCredentialStoreService` could consume those records and build a live credential cache, giving the proxy access to the same credentials the broker uses without any separate tooling or credential duplication.

This wouldn't replace the KeyStore provider — operators who want credential isolation would still use that. But for the (arguably more common) case where operators just want SASL termination without maintaining a parallel credential store, it could eliminate the credential island problem entirely.

Obvious concerns: `__cluster_metadata` is an internal topic, not a public API, so this would couple the proxy to KRaft internals. But it might be worth exploring as a separate piece of work.

Author: This isn't actually possible. Kafka brokers don't expose `__cluster_metadata` as a consumable topic, and `DescribeUserScramCredentials` deliberately does not return credential material (salt, serverKey, storedKey). In AK SCRAM credentials are write-only by design. I've added this as a rejected alternative. Addressed in 4ddc4f9.

- `byte[]` fields (`salt`, `serverKey`, `storedKey`) use defensive copies in both the constructor and accessors.
- `toString()` redacts sensitive fields (salt, serverKey, storedKey).
- `iterations` must be at least 4096 (RFC 5802 minimum).
- `hashAlgorithm` must be `"SHA-256"` or `"SHA-512"`.

**Exception hierarchy:**

```java
public class CredentialLookupException extends Exception { ... }

public class CredentialServiceUnavailableException extends CredentialLookupException { ... }

public class CredentialServiceTimeoutException extends CredentialLookupException { ... }
```

- `CredentialLookupException` -- base exception for credential lookup failures (service-level issues, not user-not-found).
- `CredentialServiceUnavailableException` -- backing service is unavailable (database down, LDAP unreachable, etc.).
- `CredentialServiceTimeoutException` -- lookup operation timed out.

#### Known limitations

- The SPI covers only SCRAM credential lookup. There is no generic credential store abstraction spanning mechanisms. This is a deliberate design decision (see [Rejected alternatives](#rejected-alternatives)).

---

### Component 6: KeyStore credential store provider

#### Summary

> The first-party credential store provider, in the `kroxylicious-sasl-credential-store-provider-keystore` module, stores SCRAM credentials in a Java `KeyStore` file. It follows the project's established pattern of using KeyStores to store secrets. Each credential is serialized as JSON and stored as a `SecretKey` entry keyed by username.

Reviewer 3: When you say "keyed by username." are you referring the PKCS12/JKS alias or friendly name?  Will this be the username?

Your words are making me imagine something like this.  

```
  KeyStore (PKCS12, password-protected)
  ├── Entry alias: "alice"
  │   Type: SecretKey
  │   Value: {"username":"alice","salt":"a2F7x...","iterations":10000,
  │           "serverKey":"Mx9p2...","storedKey":"Qk7Rf...","hashAlgorithm":"SHA-256"}
  │
  ├── Entry alias: "bob"
  │   Type: SecretKey
  │   Value: {"username":"bob","salt":"pL3nY...","iterations":10000,
  │           "serverKey":"Tn4kW...","storedKey":"Vx8mQ...","hashAlgorithm":"SHA-512"}
```

Have you checked that common tools such as keytool and openssl will accept the keystores formed in that way?  Obviously, I'm not expecting them to be able to interpret the JSON in any useful way, but if they were to say, crash, that would be a source of support issues.  Admins (who might not know anything about kroxylicious) will naturally reach for the standard tools, not the kroxylicious CLI.

Author: Good question. It turns out JKS/PKCS12 are both case-insensitive, `keytool` fails on various special characters in aliases, and Kafka doesn't apply SASLprep so any UTF-8 bytes can appear in usernames. The alias is now a lowercase hex-encoded SHA-256 hash of the username (64 chars, case-insensitive-safe). The original username is stored in the JSON payload. Addressed in c831a65, 9113b24.

- A 12-character minimum password length is enforced, following [NIST SP 800-63B][nist-sp800-63b] guidance.
- SCRAM credentials are generated with 10,000 PBKDF2 iterations and 20 bytes of random salt. The [RFC 5802][rfc5802] minimum is 4,096 (which is also the Kafka broker default). The [OWASP Password Storage Cheat Sheet][owasp-password-storage] currently recommends 600,000 iterations for PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256, but that guidance targets password storage hashing where derivation happens once at write time. In SCRAM, the client performs the derivation on every authentication, so the iteration count directly affects authentication latency. 10,000 provides a reasonable balance between brute-force resistance and authentication performance for Kafka's typically long-lived connections.
- On POSIX systems, newly created KeyStore files are set to owner-only permissions (`rw-------`). When loading an existing KeyStore for modification (`add-user`, `remove-user`, `update-password`, `list-users`), the tool checks that the file does not have group or world read/write permissions and refuses to proceed if it does.

> #### Threats and mitigations

Reviewer 3: Can you add a section discussing upgrade considerations?  I expect that we will want to make sure that the JSON has a version field, so we can evolve the format whilst continuing to support the original format.

Author: Addressed in 2bf4685.

**Accepted risk: credential material in JVM heap.** SCRAM credential data (serverKey, storedKey, salt) is held in memory for the lifetime of the proxy. An attacker who can obtain a heap dump (e.g. via JMX, `/proc/<pid>/mem`, or a core dump) can extract this material. There is no practical mitigation within a JVM. Operators should protect heap dump access through operational controls (JMX authentication, file permissions on core dumps, container security policies).

Note: `ScramCredential` uses defensive copies for `byte[]` fields and redacts `toString()`, but these are correctness measures (preventing accidental mutation and log leakage), not security mitigations against heap inspection.

#### Known limitations

- **No hot reloading.** Credential changes require a proxy restart or virtual cluster reconfiguration. The KeyStore is loaded once at construction time.

> ---

Reviewer: This section reads as a summary of per-component mitigations rather than a security model.

The motivation section does the heavy lifting on *why* — credential isolation, zero-trust edge auth, broker-less auth. Those establish that the proxy is now the authentication boundary. But this section doesn't connect back to that. It jumps straight to mitigations without articulating what the proxy's new role means for trust and protection.

Today the proxy doesn't hold authentication decision criteria — the broker holds the credentials, the IdP holds the tokens, the proxy just passes bytes. With SASL termination, the proxy becomes the custodian of authentication material: SCRAM credentials in memory, JWKS keys cached locally. That's a step change in trust level.

I think this section should bridge from the motivation to the mitigations: given that the proxy is now the auth boundary, what are the trust boundaries? What are we now responsible for protecting that we weren't before? The per-component threats should fall out of that model — otherwise it's hard to tell if the coverage is complete.

Author: It's meant as a summary of per-component mitigations rather than a security model. The mitigations here are simply the obvious industry standard ones which apply to securing credentials.

A comprehensive security model would be a lot of content, and I think that would harm the readability of this proposal if we tried to do it here. For a start it's difficult to write a threat model when you're not the end user of the software, and without a threat model it's difficult to really say whether something is secure. 

Added a framing paragraph explicitly naming the trust boundary shift: the proxy is now the authentication boundary and custodian of credential material. Recommended a comprehensive threat model as a separate activity. Addressed in 8e958cb.

Reviewer: Thanks — the framing paragraph helps. Agree that a comprehensive threat model is better as a separate activity.

### Observability

#### Runtime-level metrics

The proxy runtime emits authentication outcome metrics when any filter announces an authentication result via `FilterContext.clientSaslAuthenticationSuccess()` or `clientSaslAuthenticationFailure()`. These apply uniformly to all authentication approaches (SASL termination, SASL inspection, transport authentication).

| Metric | Type | Tags | Description |
|--------|------|------|-------------|
| `kroxylicious_client_auth_total` | Counter | `virtual_cluster`, `mechanism`, `outcome` (`success` / `failure`) | Authentication outcomes. |

#### Filter-specific metrics

The SASL termination filter emits additional metrics for authentication latency and session expiry.

| Metric | Type | Tags | Description |

> |--------|------|------|-------------|

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we want something similar to client auth total that is specific to SASL, so that we can see how many initial/reauth attempts are being made to give some insight that reauth is functioning and help debug whether it's initial or reauth attempts failing.

| `kroxylicious_filter_sasl_termination_auth_total` | Counter | `virtual_cluster`, `mechanism`, `outcome` (`success` / `failure`), `auth_type` (`initial`/`reauth`) | Authentication outcomes. |

Author: I'd prefer to avoid adding metrics speculatively. Whether an auth is initial or reauth should be inferable from existing observables: a second `kroxylicious_client_auth_total` increment on a connection that already had one is a reauth. We can add a dedicated metric later if operators report a concrete diagnostic gap.

> |--------|------|------|-------------|

Reviewer 2: Might be useful to have a counter for unauthorized RPCs that arrive before the user is authenticated.

| `kroxylicious_filter_sasl_termination_auth_duration_seconds` | Timer | `virtual_cluster`, `mechanism` | Authentication latency, exclusive of the configured fixed timing delay. Measures the real work: credential store lookup, token validation, SCRAM rounds. |
| `kroxylicious_filter_sasl_termination_session_expired_total` | Counter | `virtual_cluster`, `mechanism` | Sessions that expired without the client reauthenticating. |

### Connection lifecycle safety

- The sealed state machine prevents invalid state transitions at compile time.
- The security barrier is enforced for all non-SASL request types. Unauthenticated requests are rejected and the connection is closed.
- On authentication failure, the connection is closed immediately.

> ### CLI tool security

Reviewer 2: we mention security quite a bit, should we put something up top near the summary as a statement about our overall security posture for this solution. It feels like implicitly we value this solution being secure because of the Authn/Authz realm it sits in, and we are choosing to diverge from what Kafka offers (SCRAM password minimum lengths, SASL Plain) because of this unwritten posture. I think it's worth being explicit.

Author: > It feels like implicitly we value this solution being secure because of the Authn/Authz realm it sits in

Well, yes, there's not point string to terminate SASL if we do so with glaring flaws. 

> and we are choosing to diverge from what Kafka offers (SCRAM password minimum lengths, SASL Plain)

FWIW: 
* Minimum password length is just enforcing NIST recommendations, IIRC. We don't _have_ to do that, but I think it moves us closer to being able to claim "secure by default". Also, since NIST now recommends against forced password rotation the JSON lacks a `last_changed_date`. But these things are always trade-offs. It seems possible that someone will come along with a compliance requirement to enforce password ageing. It doesn't have to be perfect right now.
* The choice to use a larger iteration count comes from OWASP. It basically boils down to making brute force attacks (whether online or offline) both and slower and more mostly. 
* SASL Plain: We could offer it, of course. It's not ruled out by this proposal. But I'd rather keep this proposal small. SCRAM provides a simple, password-based mechanism without requiring additional infra (_c.f._ `OAUTHBEARER`) which is just as usable from the PoV of a app developer writing a Kafka application. So I don't see a good use case for PLAIN.

Reviewer 2: :+1: I should have been clearer, I agree with the proposal diverging from Kafka, using more up to date security requirements than whatever Kafka chose back in the day. Was just asking for a sentence somewhere saying, "since this is in the security domain we're going to adopt current/stronger security advice rather than support everything Apache Kafka does"

Author: Added an explicit security posture statement at line 62. Addressed in 30f58af.

- If GSSAPI support is needed in the future, it could be added as a new `MechanismHandler` implementation, but the operational and trust model would need careful design.

## References

- [Proposal 004 — Terminology for Authentication][proposal-004]
- [Proposal 006 — API to expose client SASL information to Filters][proposal-006]
- [RFC 4422 — Simple Authentication and Security Layer (SASL)][rfc4422]
- [RFC 5802 — Salted Challenge Response Authentication Mechanism (SCRAM)][rfc5802]
- [RFC 6750 — The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework: Bearer Token Usage][rfc6750]
- [RFC 7628 — A Set of Simple Authentication and Security Layer (SASL) Mechanisms for OAuth][rfc7628]
- [KIP-84 — Support SASL SCRAM mechanisms][kip84]
- [KIP-255 — OAuth Authentication via SASL/OAUTHBEARER][kip255]
- [KIP-368 — Allow SASL Connections to Periodically Re-Authenticate][kip368]
- [NIST SP 800-63B — Digital Identity Guidelines: Authentication and Lifecycle Management][nist-sp800-63b]

[proposal-004]: 004-terminology-for-authentication.md
[proposal-006]: 006-filter-api-to-expose-client-sasl-info.md

> [proposal-072]: 070-routing-api.md

Reviewer 3: nit: 72 vs 70
